---
layout: post
title:  "Year One"
date:   2015-05-12 09:30:00
categories:
---
Today, I have been at Washington University for one year. I have also been living in downtown St. Louis for a year, cooking for myself for a year, paying bills for a year, riding the MetroLink for a year, and been anxiously waiting for IKEA to open for a year (we’re almost there). It has been a great year, made possible by my family, friends, coworkers, and the local Kaldi's baristas.

I work as a web developer in the Office of Medical Public Affairs at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis. That is the full version. I usually shorten it to ‘web developer at Wash U School of Medicine’, which is still just a few too many words for a new acquaintance to remember. It is the job I didn’t know if I would get, and the one I am so excited to have.

In the last year, I coded the homepage and various page elements for the Office of Medical Student Affairs, the Sleep Medicine Center, Medical Student Admissions, the Human Research Protection Office, and the Information Security Office. I coded 12 Outlook Magazine features and assisted with the setup and email update of each digital issue. I developed a cost calculator for the Office of Financial Aid, and maintained the core code that most of our new sites are built on. There are plenty of projects still making their way to launch, each with their own unique challenges. I am looking forward to showing them off when they are live.

As this is my first full time job, I have naturally learned quite a bit, both in how an office operates and in my day to day work. I’ve had the opportunity to explore all of the things I was so curious about before, but didn’t have the time for. I learned how to make SVGs and optimize them, how to use Vagrant to handle my local sites, how to use Gulp, and how to use Git with a team (I seem to always be learning more about that one). All of the things I used to tinker with in my free time before can now be front and center, and it is awesome.

Outside of work, I’ve been happy to be able to keep up with freelance projects. Last summer, I helped with the launch of a new website for the Jacksonville Area Convention & Visitors Bureau. It’s responsive, and a massive update from their old site. I really loved working on it. Around the same time, I worked on a section of the WLDS/WEAI Radio website devoted to the county fairs in the surrounding area. This past winter, I launched a website for Worrell Land Services, and another for Cowman Auction. No wonder my time is limited.

When I just need to do nothing for a bit, I watch Netflix, where I have become addicted to House of Cards, Scandal, and Mad Men. Let’s not talk about that one weekend where all that I did was watch House of Cards Season 3. It was snowy outside, so I still don’t regret it. I don’t. I don’t! I have also been reading quite a bit. I read both of Andy Cohen’s books, and they were both very interesting. Why aren’t the real housewives on Netflix? I also read Lena Dunham’s book, as well as Neil Patrick Harris’s autobiography. Sensing a pattern, I have recently made several trips to the bookstore to purchase books not written by a celebrity.

I found out in January that I was having heart palpitations. They’ve since gone away, but there was a length of time where I wasn’t sure what was going on. I was given a few tests, and all of them came back completely normal. There was never an official cause, but I have a few guesses. For one, I had become a frequent consumer of coffee. Working in an office makes that very easy to pull off. I’ve been largely caffeine free since January. And so so calm. Another one of my guesses is that I watched as my city was literally burning to the ground around the end of November, and it really got to me.

Just a few weeks ago, I decided to take a long weekend trip to Chicago, which was super fun, a little chilly, and a great opportunity to get away on my own. I went to the Art Institute, ate good food, went to an improv show, drank really good coffee, went shopping, ate good food, went on a bike tour, peered out at the city at night from the Hancock tower, took an architecture tour, and went to Shake Shack (ate good food). It was all well deserved, if I do say so myself. Aside from the trip, I also recently purchased a bike. I’m still not sure how to ride it in a city, but I’m figuring it out. It’s all about being in the way of as few people as possible. I’ll be an expert in no time.

Yesterday, I opened up a package from my mom, and in it she sent me a book of photos (she loves Shutterfly) from my graduation last year. Flipping through it, it feels like it was just yesterday. I remember the feeling of everything coming to a close, and the excitement of all that was waiting. It’s crazy how quickly the last year has passed. It has been incredible, and I am so grateful for everything I have been able to accomplish.
